From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, our weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number two
41. Recorded live Thursday, November 18th, 2010.
Support for Hanselman it's provided
by Telerik rad controls, the
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web applications online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this
episode, Scott talks with Lauren
booneyard about the model view
view model pattern. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman, and this
is another episode of Hansel
minutes on today's show. We're
going to learn about model
view, view model, and we've
got a MVVM expert, Lauren,
booneyard calling in, where are
you now? You're traveling. No,
I'm actually back home. I
was in Berlin last week
for ticket Europe and I
came back last weekend and
I'm home now for a
moment. Ah, fantastic. Well, thanks
so much for pausing your
travels for a moment and
chatting with us. I appreciate
it. Yeah, me too, actually.
So I'm trying to get
my head around MVVM and
you know, folks know that
I'm a web person and
I've done a lot of
MVC and you know, MVVM,
for some people who don't
do WPF or Silverlight on
a regular basis is, you
know, yet another acronym that
sounds confusing. It's another architectural
pattern. It's another thing to
learn. And also I hear
a lot that the Microsoft
tools don't necessarily give me
a real strong of strong
scaffolding, a strong framework for
which to put my MVVM
model on top of. So
I need you to start
at the beginning, help me
understand what MVVM is, what
model view, view model is,
how it relates to MVC
what's missing. What's not, and
what I can do to,
to get good at this.
Sure. So, so MVVM is
very similar to MVC in
the, in the sense that
it's also a separation pattern.
So it's a pattern which
is used to separate components
in your application and like
the name shows. So the
M and the V right,
the model and the view
are actually the same as
in MVC. The big difference
is really at the controller
level. And in MVVM what
we do is that instead
of having one controller for
the application, which is kind
of driving the views, we
actually have for each of
you, we have an object
called a view model, or
sometimes also called a presentation
model. And that's the major
difference. This pattern has quite
A few advantages in Silverlight
and WPF over MVC. You
know, it doesn't mean that
you cannot use MVC in
Silverlight and WPF, but it's
just a pattern, which is
a little bit more natural
when you do a Silverlight
and WPF. When I'm doing
MVC model view controller, the
controller is what we call
a front controller in that
it's on the front lines.
And it's the first thing
that gets called when someone
clicks a button or does
something where's the controller in
a, in MVVM. Well, in
MVVM things are a little
bit different in the sense
that we rely very much
on a, on something, which
is very powerful in Silverlight
and WPF, which is called
a data binding and what
you do when, you know,
every time the user is
actuating, something on the view.
There is actually this action
is passed directly to the
view model. In fact, now
there are cases where it's
a little bit different because
you have also in the
views, right? You know, like
in a, in asp.net, you
also have some code behind,
behind your views, which can
be executed. We try to,
to reduce the amount of
code behind, because code behind
is a little bit more
difficult to test automatically with
unit tests. So what we
try to do is really
to have a communication, which
is as direct as possible
between the view, which is
actually rated by the user
and the view model, which
is going to react to
this actuation by executing, you
know, methods, et cetera. We
have a few tools at
our disposal to do that.
So data mining, which I
mentioned, which is really, you
know, linking or binding the
view to the view model,
and also a things called
commands, for example, which are
really way from the view
to actuate something on the
view model directly. So in
this sense, the controller is,
you know, it's kind of,
how should I say it's
kind of dispatched between multiple
objects. And in fact, we
don't have just one controller
or one view model, but
in fact, we have, for
every view in the application,
we have an object which
is fulfilling. Okay, well, let
me try to put it
into the context of the
kinds of demos that I
usually see when someone is
learning server light or WPF.
Let's say that I have
a book object that's in
the database and I make
a data access layer. And
I go, and I get
a list of books. So
I'm in some code somewhere,
and I have a list
of books. And in, in
demos, someone might just data
bind that list of book
directly from the database or
entity framework and put it
into a data grid or
a list. And they'll say,
Hey look, great job data
binding is wonderful. What's bad
about me doing that, just
taking a list of books
from the database and putting
it on the screen. Well,
You know, the biggest problems
that you will get in
that particular example, right, is
that if you suddenly decide
to move to a different
database system, or you decide
to move to different ORM,
or, you know, you decide
to do to separate your
application in a client server
and to have the, you
know, the client running on
the computer, on the client
computer, for example, in the
web browser, or we Silverlight,
and, and you want to
have your database on another
computer. What it means is
that you're going to have
to modify quite a lot
of things in your application
while a, when you use
a separation pattern, like MVVM,
for example, what you will
need to change in that
particular case, you know, you
will have the connection to
the objects, which is going
to be done in the
view model, but your view
will mainly remain unchanged actually.
So you try to have,
you know, as loose a
coupling as possible between your
view on one end and
the database at the other
end or whatever data persistence
system you have. And by
adding some layers in between
you really fulfill that. So
that's one advantage of MVVM,
there are others, but this
one makes the application really
more maintainable and easier to
extend. So that's probably one
of the main advantages. Where
would I start in an
example like that is this
in a small example, is
this simply a matter of
just making a, a book's
view model class, which is
effectively a copy of, of,
of a book and then
shuffling data back and forth
between the two I'm not
quiet. So the view model
is really bound to the
view. So for example, in
your particular example, you would
have maybe a view, which
is called a shelf for
a bookshelf, right? And you
have all your books, objects,
which appear on that shelf.
So what you would have
in that case, you would
have really a bookshelf view
model, which is driving the
whole know data, getting the
data and preparing them in
collections. So that's the first
view models that you get
in your applications. This is
a view model, which is
driving the view is then
after that your book objects,
there are multiple cases, right?
In, in one case, let's
say you get your book
objects directly from NTT frameworks
through WCF. For example, in
that particular case, you can
actually be able to represent
your book objects directly in
the view, because a WCF
has that particular rate is
at when it's wrapping an
object and any creates a
proxy object, it will actually
make it so that you
can data bind two properties
on that object. And, you
know, the secret behind that
magic is called I notify
property change. So this, this
very important interface that we
have in civil rights, WPF,
in fact, whole of.net, which
data binding rely on. So
in the particular case of
the book, you know, the
bookshelf, you actually don't really
have to wrap your book
object in a view model,
but you will be, you
will have to wrap them
in a, in a view
model, if you want to
add properties. And those properties
are typically things which are
very much view oriented. Like
for example, let's imagine that
you want to modify the
title of a book and
then save that back to
the database, right? What you
can do is have a
property, which is called East
dirty, for example, and this
property is set to true
when the title has been
modified by the user, but
the book has not been
saved yet to the database.
These kinds of properties are
not seeing that you want
to proceed in the database.
What you do is that
you create a wrapper around
your data object or on
your book object. And that's
also what we call a
view model. There is a
slight confusion because of the,
because we use the same
name for the view model,
which is driving the view
and for the view model,
which is a wrapper around
the data object. But in
a sense, it's all the
same. It's here to host
properties that you can data
bind to actually, Well, that
brings up an interesting question
because when someone is doing
XAML X, a M L
XAML, there is this thing
called a, a value converter,
and people will say, ah,
this is the moment when
you change the data to
look more like the view,
but it sounds like what
you're describing is that I'm
going to do more of
that work in the code
behind, and basically get the
view model as close as
possible to being a model
of the view as possible.
And the data binding would
then would come in in
the XAML would do less
work. Yeah, that's absolutely correct.
So one issue, so value
converters are great and there
are definitely places where you
absolutely need them on the,
you know, on the other
hand, a value converters are
a little bit costly in
terms of performance. And especially
when you use them on
the windows phone, which, you
know, it's a, it's a
computer, but it's a smaller
and less powerful computer. So
that can actually cost you
quite a lot of Perth.
So what we do instead
is since we have the
view model, which is preparing,
which is kind of, you
know, massaging the, the data
for you, right. And preparing
them, you know, in the
sense that you can really
buy into them very easily.
It's actually easier to not
use value converters. And instead
to just have a property,
which is of the right
type, this led quite a
few people to say that
when you use MVVM, you
just don't need value converters
anymore. In fact, you know,
I, I think it's actually
a little bit more subtle
than that. There are cases
where value converters will actually
make your life easier. So
why not use them? But
it's true that in many
cases you can actually rely
on simply having an additional
property on your view model
and, and prepare the data
in that way. And that
will definitely enhance your performance,
you know, in Silverlight and
WPF on the desktop. You
might not even notice that,
but on the phone, it's
actually not disabled. So you
need to be careful about
that. Could you give an
example using our book, examples,
say something about what a
value converter is and kind
of a typical example. I
think not everyone who's listening
would know what a value
converter is. If I was
doing it the regular way,
and I had a property
on my book and I
used a value converter, what,
what would the, what would
that provide me? And what's
an example. Well, you know,
you could imagine that, for
example, your book has a
promotion, right? So let's say,
okay, this week, 20% less
on that book, and this
information is actually stored in
the database, right? So when
you get the object, you
will have maybe a Boolean
flag, for example, which says,
okay, now I have 20%,
you know, 20% discount, or
you could even have a
double value, which says that
the percentage that is discounted
like 20% less right now
with this value, it's actually
a little bit hard to
start something at the level
of the view, because I
might want to show a
visual indication that there is
a promotion on that book.
Like maybe show up a
flag or show, you know,
anything. Right. I can not
really do that directly because
all I have for me
is, is a bullion or
a double. And what I
really want to have is,
you know, something which is,
for example, a VBT, visibility's
a, is a type, it's
an, it's an Anthem. Actually
it can be visible or
collapsed. And until the light,
we use that to show,
to hide visual elements. So
what you can do is
wrap your book into a
book view model, and add
a property, which is called
the well in that case.
Okay. You, you asked with
the value converter, right? So
if I don't use a
view model, what I will
do is that I will
create a bullion to visibility
converter, which is actually the
converters that would probably use
the most in a sea
of light. And then you
will say, okay, my visual
element indicating the promotion is
going to be the data
bound to that flag, to
that bullion flags through the
Boolean to visibility converter. So
every time I have the
value true, then the visibility
of the visual element will
be visible. And then the
user will see that there
is something. So that's an
example of a value converter.
Now, if you don't want
to use the value converter,
what you can do is
wrap your data object in
a, in a book view
model and expose the property,
which is of type visibility
directly. And what this property
does is just, you know,
fetch the flagging and return
visible or collapsed depending on
the flag. Hi, this is
Scott coming to you from
another place in time. Are
you using agile practices to
manage your software development? There's
lots of tools in the
market that manage the steps
of a project, but most
of them focus on roles,
get ready for a solution
that caters for the success
of the whole team. Guys
at Tellerik introduced team pulse.
It's an agile project management
tool. That'll help you gather
ideas, estimate plan, track progress
in a common workspace. Finally,
companies, regardless of their size
can use a lightweight and
convenient tool that makes all
the stakeholders work as a
United team. Even if they're
in different countries by combining
intuitive energy interface and the
power server light team poles
removes the roadblocks that you
typically face and applying agile
in an effective manner, no
more lost data, no disparate
systems, no lack of critical
analytics regarding the health philosophy
project. See if yourself get
a free copy for five
users in one project at
tellerik.com/team pulse. And please do
thank Tellerik for supporting Hansel
minutes on their Facebook fan
page, facebook.com/t L E R
I K coloring. We do
appreciate it. There wouldn't be
a Hansel minutes if there
wasn't teller helping us. Okay.
So let me paraphrase and
see if I understand since
hiding you're making something visible
or not visible in, in
server light and WPF is,
is an enumeration, not just
a simple Boolean and data
binding is effectively a free
four loop. When I data
buying something, I say, Hey,
that collection over there, I
want you to apply it
to this grid over here.
And then the four loop
for a, as it were
is done for you, someone's
spins through your list and
applies it to a grid
or a list with a
value converter. That conversion is
going to happen on each
item. Every single time that
binding happens. You know, if
you run your application for
hours and you bind dozens
and dozens of times that
value converters running over and
over and over hundreds, thousands,
millions of times. But if
I simply say that the
view model is in fact,
a model for the view,
I do that on the
backend. And then when I
do my data binding, I'm
simply not sending a bullying,
but rather the enumeration that
the data binding wants, which
means data binding does less
work. Is that correct? There
is something which is not
quite correct in what you
said in that the data
mining is actually not going
to be executed like millions
of times or, or anything,
right. It's going to be
executed only when the value
changes, which is not very
often. So in matter of
fact, you know, it will
be executed quite often when
you do have, you know,
things like UI virtualization, which
means that the view is
a template for the item
is going to be rendered
quite often. UI virtualization is
a technique where all the
items, which are outside of
the visible screen are actually
garbage collected, right? So you,
you don't see them anymore,
which means that they are
just going from memory so
you can improve performance like
that. This is a great
technique, but every time that
you bring those items into
view, then you know, the
data template is recreated and
then the binding is going
to be evaluated. And then
you will get your value
converters in the way, in
that sense, you know, having
a property on the view
model is not going to
solve that problem. It is
just going to avoid having
an additional level of indirection
through the value converter. So
again, you know, on silver,
right on the desktop, you
will probably hardly notice it.
We just noticed that binding
in general on the phone
is a little bit slower
and biting through converters on
the phone is noticeably. So
we try to avoid that.
Okay. So that the, we
always want our phone to
use a Scott goo term.
We always want the scrolling
to be buttery smooth. And
if I have, you know,
thousands of items, but I
have a viewport that's showing
10 or 15 as I
scroll in and out and
know scroll quickly, is that
when the value converter is
going to be firing, because
that's when the data binding
is firing. Yeah. That's exactly
that if your user, you
have each virtualization, which is
what most applications actually do,
your value converters is going
to be fired every time.
That's correct. But if I
had, you know, hundreds or
thousands of items analyst, except
this time, the list is
a view model, would I
have not created the pooling?
And would I have not
done the conversion of the
Boolean to visibility for items
that may never even be
shown? So I may have
done the work ahead of
time. Yes You can. So
you can do things like
that, right? There are multiple
techniques to do to load
data, right? So virtualization is
definitely one technique. Another technique
would be to preload the
items and to not virtualize
them at the same time.
The big issue here is
that it's really, it's really
more complicated to implement because
a virtualization is given by
the, by the control, by
the least books control, which
is built in Silverlight. So
you don't have to worry
about that. If you start
doing pre-loading items and cashing
them and fetching them in
oven, in advance and executing
the conversion, this is called
that you need to write.
So it's more complex. One
of the things that Microsoft
has been criticized on specifically
around MVVM is that there,
there, there wasn't, or maybe
isn't, now you can tell
me standardization, you know, from
Microsoft, it's not like I
say, file new project and
I'm all set for formal
MVVM and this has caused,
you know, a dozen or
more model view, view, model
toolkits to pop up, which
I think is confusing for
new people who were about
to start out. Yeah, yeah.
That has been, that has
been an issue, especially, I
would say last year, and
in the beginning of this
year, we starting actually things
coming out of Microsoft. Like
for example, there is if
you install the, is a
blend SDK, there is actually
a data application there, which
is built according to MVVM.
If you install a prison,
especially in the, in the
new version, in version four,
they do actually have guidance
and, and, and components, which
help you to build MVP
and applications. So the good
news is that Microsoft has
been listening to the community
and, and checking, you know,
what is maybe the best
practices out there and, and
using that at the same
time, I think that MVVM
has really started to emerge
in the community. I mean,
even though, you know, Silverlight
and WPF are built according
to MVVM, so this pattern
is there from the start,
but I think we really
started to use it a
lot in the community, especially
like in my case, I,
I started using it a
lot because I wanted to
work with designers in expression
blend, and that made my
life so much easier for
other people that I know
they started using it because
they absolutely wanted to, you
know, to unit test large
parts of their applications, including
the view models. And it
absolutely made sense to have
the separation in place. So
for different reasons, we saw
really in the community, a,
a large movement in favor
of MVVM, if you want.
And as with all things,
right, when you see people
selling, using a pattern, you
start to repeat the whole,
you know, the whole code
sequence over and over again.
And that's when you start
creating toolkits and frameworks, basically.
So, you know, there are
quite a few frameworks around,
I sing that in time,
you know, especially this year,
we saw a few, you
know, a few frameworks, which
emerged as being probably as
most used. And especially now
with windows seven, we saw
that there are actually a
couple of frameworks, which are,
which are used, which are
really from the community at
the same time. We see
some guidance coming out out
of Microsoft. And I know
that I've been talking with
quite a few people at
Microsoft about that in the
prison team and, and outside.
And so I think there
is kind of a guidance
coming up, but yeah, there
was definitely some confusion around
that in the beginning. You're
Is there official MVVM guidance
from, from Microsoft? I mean,
I see that on the
WPF code Plex site, that
there's a toolkit from 2009.
And when you mentioned prism,
what's the official MVVM toolkit
from Microsoft. And then what
are some open source ones
that you would recommend In
terms of a toolkit at
Microsoft? I don't really know.
One, I think that the
closes that they have is
really, as you know, in
the prison guidance, they have
really parts which are really
talking about MVVM and explaining
how to, how to take
advantage of that pattern and
how to implement it. And
in the prison libraries, you
also have components that you
can actually use build applications
according to the MVVM pattern.
So that's really where I
would look now as a
WPF tool key that you
mentioned as far as I
know, was something like an
experiment. And I don't think
it was actually ever maintained
further than the 0.1 or
whatever it was. So I
think that's probably not the
best direction to look into.
So yeah, I would definitely
look into prison in terms
of open source. You know,
there are quite a few,
like you mentioned. I think
that we see, we see
a few toolkit emerging as
being quite popular. So one
is definitely caliber. Calorie burn
is a toolkit, which is
made by Rob Eisenberg. He's
a, an MVP and his
tool kit is very, very
impressive in terms of what
it can do in terms
of features and functionality. It's
a toolkit that relies on
convention over configuration, which is
topic also quite popular nowadays.
And I think definitely was
looking into that. The other
two kids that I have
to mention obviously is the
one that I'm, I'm doing
myself. So it's called the
MVVM light toolkit. It's also
open source. It's on code
Plex. And these tool kits
took a different approach and
calorie burn. It's a lot
less powerful. It's a lot
lighter. So you can basically
use whatever components you want
and leave the rest. And,
but if you want to
use the whole thing, you
can go into a visual
studio and do found new
project, new MVVM light application
and have everything, which is
pre-wired. There are, you know,
some others coming up. One
is called Jones, for example,
foreseeable light and windows, phone
seven Zara, a few others
as well, you know, probably
too many to mention, but
I think caliber and then
MVVM night or the tools
that I see being quite
popular nowadays. Now speaking kind
of generally, when I install
a framework like this, what,
what am I getting? If
this is a simple model,
then why do I, what
do I need a framework?
And when I install something
like this, how is it
constraining me and hopefully helping
me. Yeah. Yeah. That's a
great question. Because, you know,
as I often say, there
is a lot of confusion
around MVVM itself. I mean,
is that, you know, is
that a pattern? Is that
a toolkit? Is that the
helper is that the DLL
or whatever MVVM is really
just a pattern. So, you
know, you can implement patterns
in multiple ways, which kind
of explains why, why there
are so many tool kits
is because they are just
helpers that help you implement
MVVM in different ways. In
the case of MPN light,
what you get when you
install it is a set
of DLLs. So there are
two DLLs plus the system
windows, interactivity, DLL, which is
from the blend DK, and
those DLL have components that
help you to build applications.
According to MVVM a one
component is a class called
relay command, which is, you
know, it's like a point
of entry for a method
that you place on your
view model. And what you
can do is at every
time your user is actuating
the control on the view,
the command is going to
be invoked directly on the
view model without having to
write and even handler. So
this is a lose way
if you want to, to
build an event, to react
to an event. And the
one reason why we use
commands in MVVM is that
we want to separate the
view from the view model,
as much as we can.
We don't want to handle
even handlers because those are
very, very tight, coupled tightly,
coupled the elements and by
using commands, what we do
is that we basically tells
the designer, you can use
any control. You like, as
long as this control is
going to invoke the command
I'm, I'm fine. And what
we tell to be Roper
is you don't know how
the command is going to
be invoked. It could be
a click on the Burton,
but it could, it could
also be a mouse left
button down on the rectangle.
For example, you don't know
that it doesn't matter. What
I want is that you
just invoke the command and
execute executor method. So commands
are very important. So you
have that. And other things
that you have is something
that I call the messenger
in, in prisons, they call
that the even aggregator. And
in fact, this is an
object which allows you to
send messages from one object
to another, but in a
very decoupled manner. So typically
if you have multiple view
models, like in WPF, you
could have multiple windows open
at the same time, or
maybe in a windows phone,
seven, you could have a
settings you model. And then
the main view model, you
can basically pass messages from
one to the other, but
in a very decoupled manner.
So that's another class. So,
you know, there are also
clouds into that, but in
a sense, if you want
those classes are not really
forcing you, you know, nobody's
forcing you to use them,
right? But if you do
implement the MVVM pattern, you
are going to be faced
with some issues that those
classes help you to solve.
So that's what they do.
And other things that MVVM
light installs, like I mentioned,
or a project templates that
you can just do a
file new project, and then
start with a, with an
application, which is already configured,
according to the MVVM pattern.
When I, when I buy
into the whole MVVM thing,
how much other things do
I have to buy into,
do I have to start
thinking about dependency, injection and
unit testing and IOC, is
this a framework that brings
other frameworks along with it
that I may or may
not be familiar with? Or
is this something that I
can get started with in
a fairly vanilla kind of
a way? Yeah. So it
depends on the implementation that
you choose, obviously. But I,
for example, in my case,
I really don't want to
force anything on anybody. So
you can implement an MDM
application without needing IOC, if
you don't want, without needing
a dependency injection framework or
anything, you don't really need
to unit tests. I mean,
obviously we recommend that you,
you need test, but you
know, if you don't want
to that's okay, your application
will work. You know, so
I would say that you
can really do that in
a very progressive manner. So
if you decide to go
with, with MVVM, I would
start with small example where
you don't use any dependency
injection, and then start building
on that. And then after
a while, you know, that's
always the same story with
dependency injection. When your application
grows, then you start seeing
the advantages of using dependency
injection to create your objects.
Like one things that we
do a lot in a
MVVM is that we decouple
actually a little bit more
than what I explained. We
use services to talk to
the model and services, to
talk to the viewer as
well. So one example could
be okay if I, if
I want to show a
dialogue to the user, I'm
going to have something which
is a dialogue service, and
this dialogue service can be
invoked. And, you know, in,
in a decoupled manner like
this, my view model, doesn't
have to worry about showing
a dialogue. It's just saying,
Hey, show me your dialogue
and give me back the
result in that seat, these
kinds of services, as well
as services. I talk to
them to the model. So
services like, okay, get books
or save a new book,
or, you know, things like
that. Those can very well
be injected inside of your
model. So if you want
using an IOC container for
that is, you know, it's
going to help you, but
if you don't want, you
can definitely go ahead and
create those services by new
exam in the code and
injecting them directly into your
model. That works, right. So
it's just a matter of
scaling. All right, well, I'm
going to put links to
all of the different frameworks
that we've talked about and
a few others, as well
as links to videos of
talks that you've done. And
other resources for folks who
are listening to get involved
and start learning about the
MVVM themselves. Very cool. Thank
you so much for taking
the time to chat with
us today on handsome minutes.
I really appreciate it. Pleasure.
This has been another episode
and I'll see you again
next week.